Bufferpool
----------

This document details a possible design for how buffers can be allocated
and managed in pools.

Bufferpools should increase performance by reducing allocation overhead and
improving possibilities to implement zero-copy memory transfer.


Current Situation
-----------------

 - elements can choose to implement a pool of buffers. These pools
   can contain buffers for both source and sink pad buffers.

 - elements can provide buffers to upstream elements when the upstream element
   requests a buffer with gst_pad_alloc_buffer().

 - The buffer pool can preallocate a certain amount of buffers to avoid
   runtime allocation. pad_alloc_buffer() is allowed to block the upstream
   element until buffers are recycled in the pool.

 - the pad_alloc_buffer function call can be passed downstream to the sink
   that actually will perform the allocation. A fallback option exists to use
   a default memory bufferpool whe there is no alloc_buffer function installed
   on a pad.

 - Upstream renegotiation is performed by making the pad_alloc_buffer function
   return a buffer with new caps.


Problems
--------

 - There is currently no helper base class to implement efficient buffer pools
   meaning that each element has to implement its own version.

 - There is no negotiation between elements about their buffer requirements.
   Upstream elements that decide to use pad_alloc_buffer() can find that the
   buffer they received is not appropriate at all. The most common problem
   is that the buffers don't have the right alignment or insufficient padding.

 - There is no negotiation of minimum and maximum amounts of preallocated
   buffers. In order to not avoid deadlocks, this means that buffer pool
   implementations should be able to allocate unlimited amounts of buffers and
   are never allowed to block in pad_alloc_buffer()


Requirements
------------

 - maintain and reuse a list of buffers in a reusable base GstBufferPool
   object

 - negotiate allocation configuration between source and sink pad.
   - have minimum and maximum amount of buffers with the option of 
     preallocating buffers.
   - alignment and padding support
   - arbitrary extra options

 - integrate with dynamic caps renegotiation

 - dynamically change bufferpool configuration based on pipeline changes.

 - allow the application to control buffer allocation


GstBufferPool
-------------

 The bufferpool object manages a list of buffers with the same properties such
 as size, padding and alignment.

 The bufferpool has two states: active and inactive. In the in-active
 state, the bufferpool can be configured with the required allocation
 preferences. In the active state, buffers can be retrieved from and
 returned to the pool.

 The default implementation of the bufferpool is able to allocate buffers
 from main memory with arbitrary alignment and padding/prefix.

 Custom implementations of the bufferpool can override the allocation and
 free algorithms of the buffers from the pool. This should allow for
 different allocation strategies such as using shared memory or hardware
 mapped memory.

 The bufferpool object is also used to perform the negotiation of configuration
 between elements.


GstPad
------

 A GstPad can query a new bufferpool from a peer element withe the BUFFERPOOL
 query. 

 The returned bufferpool object can then be configured with the desired
 parameters of the buffers it should provide.
 
 When the bufferpool is configured, it must be pushed downstream with the
 BUFFERPOOL event.  This is to inform a pad and its peer pad that a bufferpool
 should be used for allocation (on source pads) and that bufferpool is used
 by the upstream element (on sinkpads).

negotiating pool and config
---------------------------

Since upstream needs to allocate buffers from a buffer pool, it should first
negotiate a buffer pool with the downstream element. We propose a simple
scheme where a sink can propose a bufferpool and some configuration and where
the source can choose to use this allocator or use its own.

The algorithm for doing this is roughly like this:


   /* srcpad knows media type and size of buffers and is ready to
    * prepare an output buffer but has no pool yet */

   /* first get the pool from the downstream peer */
   res = gst_pad_query_bufferpool (srcpad, &pool);

   if (pool != NULL) {
     GstBufferPoolConfig config;

     /* clear the pool so that we can reconfigure it */
     gst_buffer_pool_set_active (pool, FALSE);

     do {
       /* get the config */
       gst_buffer_pool_get_config (pool, &config);

       /* check and modify the config to match our requirements */
       if (!tweak_config (&config)) {
         /* we can't tweak the config any more, exit and fail */
         gst_object_unref (pool);
         pool = NULL;
         break;
       } 
     }
     /* update the config */
     while (!gst_buffer_pool_set_config (pool, &config));

     /* we managed to update the config, all is fine now */
     /* set the pool to active to make it allocate things */
     gst_buffer_pool_set_active (pool, TRUE);
   }

   if (pool == NULL) {
     /* still no pool, we create one ourself with our ideal config */
     pool = gst_buffer_pool_new (...);
   }

   /* now set the pool on this pad and the peer pad */
   gst_pad_push_event (pad, gst_event_new_bufferpool (pool));


Negotiation is the same for both push and pull mode. In the case of pull
mode scheduling, the srcpad will perform the negotiation of the pool
when it receives the first pull request.


Allocating from pool
--------------------

 Buffers are allocated from the pool of a pad:

  res = gst_buffer_pool_acquire_buffer (pool, &buffer, &params);

 convenience functions to automatically get the pool from a pad can be made:
  
  res = gst_pad_acquire_buffer (pad, &buffer, &params);

 Buffers are refcounted in te usual way. When the refcount of the buffer
 reaches 0, the buffer is automatically returned to the pool. This is achieved
 by setting and reffing the pool as a new buffer member.

 Since all the buffers allocated from the pool keep a reference to the pool,
 when nothing else is holding a refcount to the pool, it will be finalized
 when all the buffers from the pool are unreffed. By setting the pool to
 the inactive state we can drain all buffers from the pool. 


Renegotiation
-------------

Renegotiation of the bufferpool might need to be performed when the
configuration of the pool changes. Changes can be in the buffer size (because
of a caps change), alignment or number of buffers. 

* downstream

  When the upstream element wants to negotiate a new format, it might need
  to renegotiate a new bufferpool configuration with the downstream element.
  This can, for example, happen when the buffer size changes.

  We can not just reconfigure the existing bufferpool because there might
  still be outstanding buffers from the pool in the pipeline. Therefore we
  need to create a new bufferpool for the new configuration while we let the
  old pool drain.

  Implementations can choose to reuse the same bufferpool object and wait for
  the drain to finish before reconfiguring the pool.

  The element that wants to renegotiate a new bufferpool uses exactly the same
  algorithm as when it first started.
  
* upstream 

  When a downstream element wants to negotiate a new format, it will send a 
  RECONFIGURE event upstream. This instructs upstream to renegotiate both
  the format and the bufferpool when needed.

  A pipeline reconfiguration is when new elements are added or removed from
  the pipeline or when the topology of the pipeline changes. Pipeline
  reconfiguration also triggers possible renegotiation of the bufferpool and
  caps.

  A RECONFIGURE event tags each pad it travels on as needing reconfiguration.
  The next buffer allocation will then require the renegotiation or
  reconfiguration of a pool.

  If downstream has specified a RENEGOTIATE flag, it must be prepared to
  received NOT_NEGOTIATED results when allocating buffers, which instructs
  it to start caps and bufferpool renegotiation. When using this flag, 
  upstream can more quickly react to downstream format or size changes.


Shutting down
-------------

 In push mode, a source pad is responsible for setting the pool to the
 inactive state when streaming stops. The inactive state will unblock any pending
 allocations so that the element can shut down.

 In pull mode, the sink element should set the pool to the inactive state when
 shutting down so that the peer _get_range() function can unblock.

 In the inactive state, all the buffers that are returned to the pool will
 automatically be freed by the pool and new allocations will fail.
 


Use cases
---------

1)  videotestsrc ! xvimagesink

 Before videotestsrc can output a buffer, it needs to negotiate caps and
 a bufferpool with the downstream peer pad.

 First it will negotiate a suitable format with downstream according to the
 normal rules.

 Then it does gst_pad_query_bufferpool() which triggers the BUFFERPOOL query.
 This bufferpool is currently in the inactive state and thus has no buffers
 allocated.

 videotestsrc gets the configuration of the bufferpool object. This
 configuration lists the desired configuration of the xvimagesink, which can
 have specific alignment and/or min/max amount of buffers.

 videotestsrc updates the configuration of the bufferpool, it will likely
 set the min buffers to 1 and the size of the desired buffers. It then
 updates the bufferpool configuration with the new properties.

 When the configuration is successfully updated, videotestsrc pushes the
 bufferpool downstream with the BUFFERPOOL event.

 It then sets the bufferpool to the active state. This preallocates
 the buffers in the pool (if needed). This operation can fail when there
 is not enough memory available. Since the bufferpool is provided by
 xvimagesink, it will allocate buffers backed by an XvImage and pointing
 to shared memory with the X server.

 If the bufferpool is successfully activated, videotestsrc can acquire a
 buffer from the pool, set the caps on it, fill in the data and push it
 out to xvimagesink.

 xvimagesink can know that the buffer originated from its pool by following
 the pool member. It might need to get the parent buffer first in case of
 subbuffers.

 when shutting down, videotestsrc will set the pool to the inactive state,
 this will cause further allocations to fail and currently allocated buffers
 to be freed. videotestsrc will then free the pool and stop streaming.


2) videotestsrc ! queue ! myvideosink

 In this second use case we have a videosink that can at most allocate
 3 video buffers.

 Again videotestsrc will have to negotiate a bufferpool with the peer 
 element. For this it will perform gst_pad_query_bufferpool() which
 queue will proxy to its downstream peer element.

 The bufferpool returned from myvideosink will have a max_buffers set to 3.
 queue and videotestsrc can operate with this upper limit because none of
 those elements require more than that amount of buffers for temporary
 storage.

 The bufferpool of myvideosink will then be configured with the size of the
 buffers for the negotiated format and according to the padding and alignment
 rules. When videotestsrc sets the pool to active, the 3 video
 buffers will be preallocated in the pool.

 The pool will then be configured to downstream elements with the BUFFERPOOL
 event. The queue will proxy the BUFFERPOOL event to its srcpad, which
 finally configures the pool all the way to the sink.

 videotestsrc acquires a buffer from the configured pool on its srcpad and
 pushes this into the queue. When the videotestsrc has acquired and pushed
 3 frames, the next call to gst_buffer_pool_acquire_buffer() will block
 (assuming the GST_BUFFER_POOL_FLAG_WAIT is specified).

 When the queue has pushed out a buffer and the sink has rendered it, the
 refcount of the buffer reaches 0 and the buffer is recycled in the pool.
 This will wake up the videotestsrc that was blocked, waiting for more
 buffers and will make it produce the next buffer. 

 In this setup, there are at most 3 buffers active in the pipeline and
 the videotestsrc is rate limited by the rate at which buffers are recycled
 in the bufferpool.

 When shutting down, videotestsrc will first set the bufferpool on the srcpad
 to inactive. This causes any pending (blocked) acquire to return with a 
 WRONG_STATE result and causes the streaming thread to pause.

 
3) .. ! myvideodecoder ! queue ! fakesink 

 In this case, the myvideodecoder requires buffers to be aligned to 128
 bytes and padded with 4096 bytes. The pipeline starts out with the
 decoder linked to a fakesink but we will then dynamically change the
 sink to one that can provide a bufferpool.

 When it negotiates the size with the downstream element fakesink, it will
 receive a NULL bufferpool because fakesink does not provide a bufferpool.
 It will then select it own custom bufferpool to start the datatransfer.

 At some point we block the queue srcpad, unlink the queue from the 
 fakesink, link a new sink, set the new sink to the PLAYING state and send
 the right newsegment event to the sink. Linking the new sink would 
 automatically send a RENEGOTIATE event upstream and, through queue, inform
 myvideodecoder that it should renegotiate its bufferpool because downstream
 has been reconfigured.

 Before pushing the next buffer, myvideodecoder would renegotiate a new
 bufferpool. To do this, it performs the usual bufferpool negotiation
 algorithm. If it can obtain and configure a new bufferpool from downstream,
 it sets its own (old) pool to inactive and unrefs it. This will eventually
 drain and unref the old bufferpool.

 The new bufferpool is set as the new bufferpool for the srcpad and sinkpad
 of the queue and set to the active state.


4) .. ! myvideodecoder ! queue ! myvideosink 

 myvideodecoder has negotiated a bufferpool with the downstream myvideosink
 to handle buffers of size 320x240. It has now detected a change in the 
 video format and need to renegotiate to a resolution of 640x480. This
 requires it to negotiate a new bufferpool with a larger buffersize.

 When myvideodecoder needs to get the bigger buffer, it starts the 
 negotiation of a new bufferpool. It queries a bufferpool from downstream,
 reconfigures it with the new configuration (which includes the bigger buffer
 size), it sets the bufferpool to active and pushes the bufferpool downstream.
 This automatically inactivates the old pool and unrefs it, which causes the
 old format to drain.

 It then uses the new bufferpool for allocating new buffers of the new 
 dimension.

 If at some point, the decoder wants to switch to a lower resolution again,
 it can choose to use the current pool (which has buffers that are larger
 than the required size) or it can choose to renegotiate a new bufferpool.


5) .. ! myvideodecoder ! videoscale ! myvideosink 

 myvideosink is providing a bufferpool for upstream elements and wants to
 change the resolution.

 myvideosink sends a RENEGOTIATE event upstream to notify upstream that a
 new format is desirable. upstream elements try to negotiate a new format
 and bufferpool before pushing out a new buffer. The old bufferpools are
 drained in the regular way.



