Effects
-------

Summary
-------
1. Basic ideas
2. Problems
3. Propositions  to solve those problems
  A. The registry
  B. Effects configurability
  C. Keyframes
4. Use-cases

The goal of this proposal is to find a simple way to handle effects through an
API which would allow developers to handle any use-case

1. Basic ideas
----------------

  * Effects are actually descendant of GESTrackOperation
  * You can add effects wherever you want
  * Effects are configurable and those could change during time
  * We should be able to handle the gnome-video-effects standard
  * We can implement complexe effects

2. Problems
----------
  * We should be able to handle list of available effects on the system at
    runtime.

  * We should be able to configure effects through an API in GES and
    not directly configuring the corresponding GstElement properties.

  * We should be able to handle complexe effects.

  * We should be able to implement complexe effects directly in GES

  * We should be able to configure effects in the time -> Keyframes without
    duplicating code from GStreamer


3. Propositions to solve those problems
---------------------------------------

A. The registry

  We could implement a GESEffectRegistry which would actually
  retrieve elements from the GSTRegistry which actually are effects,
  as well as effects from gnome-video-effects. This way the developers
  could have the list of all the effects that are installed on the système
  pretty easily.

B. Effects configurability

  The idea to be able to configure effects through a simple API in GES would
  be to create a class GESEffect which would actually be a mapping between
  a GESTrackOperation and the properties of the GstElements contained in the
  GESTrackOperation.
  Basicly it would allow the retrieving of all configurable elements properties:
    * names
    * human readable names
    * types
    * possible values
    * ...
  We would also have a method to set those properties easily

  The problem which also happens is that in the case of gnome-video-effects,
  we should be able to allow access to some properties whiches have been
  specified. We will need to improve the current standard in order to handle
  this use-case.

C. Keyframes
  We may want to handle this use-case directly in GES and for any kind of
  time related configuration? FIXME
    => Special specifications for that?

4. Use-cases
-----------

  The user wants to add an effect to an entire clip => GESTimelineObject new API

  The user wants to add an effect to an entire layer => GESTimelineLayer API.

  The developer wants to allow his users to configure effects => mapping between 
  GESTrackEffect and the configurable properties of elements (GESEffect).

  The user wants to add an effect on a special portion of a clip, we should 
  allow him to configure that thanks to a system of keyframes. FIXME

  We want to implement an effect which isn't only composed by a bin, but is more
  complexe than that (ex: "effect '24'") => we have the GESTrackOperation
  which is the base class (abstract) for this kind of implementation. We should 
  also have a GESPropertiesMapping abstract class which would be the base 
  class of GESEffect and could be used in this use-case.

  A developer wants to implement effect which handle music and video at the same
  time, Would the solution be to implement a GESTimelineEffect to handle this
  special usecase? FIXME
